Small. Fast. Reliable.
Choose any three.

Home

Menu

About

Documentation

Download

License

Support

Purchase

Search

About

Documentation

Download

Support

Purchase

Search Documentation
Search Changelog

The Percentile Extension

Table Of Contents

1. Overview

1.1. Availability

2. Aggregate Functions Implemented By Percentile

2.1. The median(Y) aggregate function

2.2. The percentile(Y,P) aggregate function

2.3. The percentile_cont(Y,P) aggregate function

2.4. The percentile_disc(Y,P) aggregate function

3. Design Requirements

1. Overview

 The percentile extension provides four aggregate functions
that compute a percentile score and/or the median value for a distribution.

1.1. Availability

The percentile extension has been part of the amalgamation since
SQLite version 3.51.0 (2025-11-04).  However, the percentile extension
is disabled by default and must be activated at compile-time using
the -DSQLITE_ENABLE_PERCENTILE compile-time option.

Prior to SQLite 3.51.0, the percentile
extension was in a separate source code file that needed to be compiled
independently and treated as a loadable extension.

2. Aggregate Functions Implemented By Percentile

The percentile extension implements the aggregate SQL functions
   described below.  The algorithms used by all of these functions
   use O(N) space and O(NlogN) time, where N is the number of non-NULL
   inputs.

2.1. The median(Y) aggregate function

The median(Y) function is an aggregate that computes the median value of
   all non-NULL inputs Y.  If any Y input to median() is not NULL and is not
   a numeric value, an error is raised.  If there are no non-NULL, numeric
   inputs, then the result of median() is NULL.

The median is the value of the center element when all the inputs are
   sorted and the number of inputs is odd.  If the number of
   inputs is even, then the median is the average of the two center inputs.

The median(Y) function is equivalent to percentile(Y,50).

2.2. The percentile(Y,P) aggregate function

The percentile(Y,P) aggregate function computes an answer X which is
   a value that is greater than or equal to P percent of the non-NULL inputs
   and which is less than or equal to 100-P percent of the inputs.  The
   parameter P must be a number between 0.0 and 100.0.  The value of P must
   be the same for all terms of the aggregate and may not be NULL.  Y inputs
   must be either NULL or numeric.  NULL values for Y are ignored.  Any
   non-NULL Y input that is not numeric causes an error to be raised.

The percentile() function works by sorting the non-NULL inputs and then
   computing the input or inputs that are closest to P percent from the first
   to the last.  The return value is the weighted average of the two closest
   inputs.

2.3. The percentile_cont(Y,P) aggregate function

The percentile_cont(Y,P) function works like percentile(Y,P) except that
   the P value spans the range of 0.0 to 1.0 instead of 0.0 to 100.0.  Thus
   the result of percentile_cont(Y,P) is the same as percentile(Y,P*100).

The percentile_cont() function is defined by SQL standards.  However, instead
   of being a simple function call "percentile_cont(Y,P)", the
   SQL-standard syntax goes like this:

SELECT percentile_cont(P) WITHIN GROUP (ORDER BY Y) FROM tab;

That is a lot of syntax to mean exactly the same thing as:

SELECT percentile_cont(Y,P) FROM tab;

SQLite will support the SQL-standard syntax, but only if it is compiled
   (from canonical sources, not from the amalgamation) using the
   -DSQLITE_ENABLE_ORDERED_SET_AGGREGATES=1 compile-time option.  Without that
   compile-time option, only the simpler "percentile_cont(Y,P)" form is supported. Since
   there are no advantages to the prolix SQL-standard format, and dramatic
   readability disadvantages, and because the SQLITE_ENABLE_ORDERED_SET_AGGREGATES
   compile-time option causes the SQLite library to be larger, that option is
   omitted from most builds.

This author believes that the "_cont" suffix on this function name is
   an abbreviation for "continuous" and reflects the fact that the return value
   is a weighted average of the two closest input values to the actual percentile
   rank.  The name is an SQL standard, not something
   chosen by the SQLite developers.

2.4. The percentile_disc(Y,P) aggregate function

The percentile_disc(Y,P) function works like percentile_cont(Y,P) except
   that instead of doing a weighted average of the closest available inputs, it
   always returns a value that is one of the input values - the smaller of the
   two possible choices.  The percentile_disc(Y,P) function is defined by SQL
   standards.  As with percentile_cont(), the prolix ordered-set aggregate syntax
   is required, but that syntax is only supported by SQLite when SQLite is
   compiled using the SQLITE_ENABLE_ORDERED_SET_AGGREGATES compile-time option.

This author believes that the "_disc" suffix on this function name is
   an abbreviation for "discrete".  The name is an SQL standard, not something
   chosen by the SQLite developers.

3. Design Requirements

The following requirements define the percentile extension.

  The percentile(Y,P) function is an aggregate function taking
     exactly two arguments.

  If the P argument to percentile(Y,P) is not the same for every
     row in the aggregate then an error is thrown.  The word "same"
     in the previous sentence means that the value differs by less
     than 0.001.

  If the P argument to percentile(Y,P) evaluates to anything other
     than a number in the range of 0.0 to 100.0 inclusive then an
     error is thrown.

 If any Y argument to percentile(Y,P) evaluates to a value that
     is not NULL and is not numeric then an error is thrown.

  If any Y argument to percentile(Y,P) evaluates to plus or minus
     infinity then an error is thrown.  (SQLite always interprets NaN
     values as NULL.)

  Both Y and P in percentile(Y,P) can be arbitrary expressions,
     including CASE WHEN expressions.

  The percentile(Y,P) aggregate is able to handle inputs of at least
     one million (1,000,000) rows.

 If there are no non-NULL values for Y, then percentile(Y,P)
     returns NULL.

  If there is exactly one non-NULL value for Y, the percentile(Y,P)
     returns the one Y value.

  If there are N non-NULL values of Y where N is two or more and
     the Y values are ordered from least to greatest and a graph is
     drawn from 0 to N-1 such that the height of the graph at J is
     the J-th Y value and such that straight lines are drawn between
     adjacent Y values, then the percentile(Y,P) function returns
     the height of the graph at P*(N-1)/100.

  The percentile(Y,P) function always returns either a floating
     point number or NULL.

  The percentile(Y,P) is implemented as a single C99 source-code
     file that compiles into a shared-library or DLL that can be loaded
     into SQLite using the sqlite3_load_extension() interface.

  A separate median(Y) function is the equivalent of percentile(Y,50).

  A separate percentile_cont(Y,P) function returns the same result as
         percentile(Y,P*100.0).  In other words, the fraction value in
         the second argument to percentile_cont() should be in the range
         of 0 to 1 instead of 0 to 100 as it is for percentile().

  A separate percentile_disc(Y,P) function is like
         percentile_cont(Y,P) except that instead of returning the weighted
         average of the nearest two input values, it returns the next lower
         value.  So the percentile_disc(Y,P) will always return a value
         that was one of the inputs.

  All of median(), percentile(Y,P), percentile_cont(Y,P) and
         percentile_disc(Y,P) can be used as window functions.
