Small. Fast. Reliable.
Choose any three.

Home

Menu

About

Documentation

Download

License

Support

Purchase

Search

About

Documentation

Download

Support

Purchase

Search Documentation
Search Changelog

List Of Virtual Tables

Table Of Contents

1. Introduction

2. Virtual Tables

1. Introduction

A virtual table is an object that presents an SQL table
interface but which is not stored in the database file, at least
not directly.  The virtual table mechanism is a feature
of SQLite that allows SQLite to access and manipulate resources
other than bits in the database file using the powerful SQL
query language.

The table below lists a few of the virtual table implementations
available for SQLite.  Developers can deploy these virtual tables
in their own applications, or use the implementations shown below
as templates for writing their own virtual tables.

The list below is not exhaustive.
Other virtual table implementations exist in the SQLite source tree
and elsewhere.
The list below tries to capture the more interesting virtual table
implementations.

2. Virtual Tables

	Name	Description

	bytecode
	A table-valued function that shows the bytecodes of a prepared
    statement.

	carray
	A table-valued function that allows a C-language array of integers,
    doubles, strings, or blobs to be used as a table in a query.

	closure
	Compute the transitive closure of a set.

	completion
	Suggests completions for partially-entered words during interactive
    SQL input.  Used by the CLI to help implement tab-completion.

	csv
	A virtual table that represents a comma-separated-value or CSV file
    (RFC 4180) as a read-only
    table so that it can be used as part of a larger query.

	dbstat
	Provides information about the purpose and use of each page in a
    database file.  Used in the implementation of the
    sqlite3_analyzer utility program.

	files_of_checkin
	Provides information about all files in a single check-in in the
    Fossil version control system.  This
    virtual table is not part of the SQLite project but is included because
    it provides an example of how to use virtual tables and because it is
    used to help version control the SQLite sources.

	fsdir
	A table-valued function returning one row for each file in a
    selected file hierarchy of the host computer.  Used by the
    CLI to help implement the .archive command.

	FTS3
	A high-performance full-text search index.

	FTS5
	A higher-performance full-text search index

	generate_series
	A table-valued function returning a sequence of
    integers, modeled after the table-valued function by the same
    name in PostgreSQL.

	json_each
	A table-valued function for decomposing a JSON string.

	json_tree
	A table-valued function for decomposing a JSON string.

	OsQuery
	Hundreds of virtual tables that publish various aspects of the
    host computer, such as the process table, user lists, active network
    connections, and so forth.
    OsQuery is a separate project, started by Facebook, hosted on
    GitHub, and intended for
    security analysis and intrusion detection.
    OsQuery is not a part of the SQLite project, but is included in this
    list because it demonstrates how the SQL language and the
    SQLite virtual table mechanism
    can be leveraged to provide elegant solutions
    to important real-world problems.

	pragma
	Built-in table-valued functions that return the results of PRAGMA
    statements for use within ordinary SQL queries.

	RTree
	An implementation of the Guttmann R*Tree spatial index idea.

	spellfix1
	A virtual table that implements a spelling correction engine.

	sqlite_btreeinfo
	This experimental table-valued function provides information about
    a single B-tree in a database file, such as the depth, and estimated
    number of pages and number of entries, and so forth.

	sqlite_dbpage
	Key/value store for the raw database file content.  The key is the
    page number and the value is binary page content.

	sqlite_memstat
	Provides SQL access to the sqlite3_status64() and
    sqlite3_db_status() interfaces.

	sqlite_stmt
	A table-valued function containing one row for each
    prepared statement associated with an open database connection.

	swarmvtab
	An experimental module providing on-demand read-only access to
    multiple tables spread across multiple databases, via a single
    virtual table abstraction.

	tables_used
	A table-valued function that shows the tables and indexes that
    are accessed by a prepared statement.

	tclvar
	Represents the global variables of a 
    TCL Interpreter as an SQL
    table. Used as part of the SQLite test suite.

	templatevtab
	A template virtual table implementation useful as a starting point
    for developers who want to write their own virtual tables

	unionvtab
	An experimental module providing on-demand read-only access to
    multiple tables spread across multiple databases, via a single
    virtual table abstraction.

	vfsstat
	A table-valued function which, in combination with a
    co-packaged VFS shim provides information on the number of
    system calls performed by SQLite.

	vtablog
	A virtual table that prints diagnostic information
    on stdout when its key methods are invoked.  Intended for
    interactive analysis and debugging of virtual table interfaces.

	wholenumber
	A virtual table returns all integers between 1 and 4294967295.

	zipfile
	Represent a
    ZIP Archive
    as an SQL table.  Works for both reading and writing.  Used by
    the CLI to implement the ability to read and write ZIP Archives.

This page was last updated on 2025-11-13 07:12:58Z
